hi I'm Jared gardener and today we are
going to talk about the basic patterns
of melanoma melanoma is a huge topic and
there's so much the entire text books
have been written about this so much to
discuss but I want to go over some of
the basic features that we see
histologically that make us think about
melanoma when we're evaluating Willie
anesthetic lesions I have a video about
the basics of benign Mullane acidic nev
eye and if you haven't watched that yet
I'll put a link in the top right corner
of this video and also in the video
description down below that might be
useful because we're going to talk about
some of the ways that melanoma violates
the rules that we usually see in benign
Nev I so a few of the things that we
look at this is a little bit of an
unusual melanoma to start with because
of all the the keratin up top there's
tons of dead keratin and scale what we
call scale para keratosis with a lot of
pigment in it up over top of the lesion
there's also some crust than there to
some serum so this was an inflamed and
irritated melanoma but all of that crust
actually made it look very much like an
inflamed seborrheic keratosis to the
dermatologist I remember distinctly
actually when I called to report the
diagnosis in this case and it was a long
time ago but I remember they were really
surprised because it really looked so
much like a seborrheic keratosis and
this is a good reminder of the
importance of what we do as pathologists
we have an important job still because
sometimes even very good dermatologists
or very good clinicians of other sorts
have difficulty distinguishing between
different entities clinically and we can
often add value and help when we look at
lesions microscopically and again this
video is for educational purposes to
help teach you like all of my videos are
this is not a consultation this doesn't
replace the need to get a consultation
if you're not sure if it's a melanoma or
not get expert help that a lot rides on
a diagnosis of melanoma versus nevis and
this is something that's very important
and for patient care and legally of
course so that's the the main point this
is true again for all of my videos
the
these are for educational purposes and
to help you learn about how we diagnose
these things but of course you have to
use your own medical judgment and get
help when you need it so one of the
first features I think that's useful
when you look at melanomas start like
just like for NIMH I start at low power
ok look at the lesion at 2x or 4x
whatever the lowest power objective is
on your scope symmetry is a useful thing
does the lesion if you draw a line down
the middle of it from top to bottom if I
go like this and make a line is the left
side a mirror image of the right side
well you might look at this and say yeah
more or less it kind of looks the same
on both sides but this is why it's
important to not just look at the middle
of the lesion in fact if I put down a
slide and I see some obvious abnormality
in the middle I oftentimes will go make
myself look out at the edges first
because I know that I'll get so fixated
on this obviously abnormal finding that
sometimes it's easy to forget looking at
the periphery of the biopsy particularly
on a broad shave biopsy and you know in
the case where you have a basal cell or
squamous cell carcinoma say we don't
have that here but if you have one of
those sometimes if you don't look at the
edge you might miss there may be a
little melanoma out to the side I've
seen that happen a few times so I try to
always make myself look at the periphery
the normal looking stuff away from the
main tumor in the middle and then when
I've determined that that's all clear
come back to the tumor that way I don't
get too fixated on the tumor and forget
to check those edges okay so just a
little a general tip for during path but
look as we go out here to the side this
may look like normal skin at first
glance compared to what we were just
looking at but look closer there are
actually melanocytes in here increased
melanocytes and you can see they're
grayish brown they have this kind of
dirty grayish cytoplasm which we often
see in melanomas but sometimes in neve i
there's a mitosis in here there's really
marked nuclear atypia a lot of the
features we're going to talk about
throughout this video but this is
melanoma out here so when you compare or
contrast that rather this doesn't look
like much maybe but here we have one
side of
lesion that looks very different from
the other side of the lesion so
asymmetrical lesions doesn't mean that
they are always melanoma but it's a
warning sign and you should go look
closer and think about the possibility
of melanoma and that's going to be true
for all of the the points that we
discuss in this video I'm going to talk
to you about a symmetry about Paget I'd
spread confluent growth abnormal
maturation or loss of maturation in the
dermis mitotic activity in the dermis
and nuclear atypia in the melanocytes
those are kind of the main features all
of those together that I think of for
melanoma the problem is is that none of
those features is perfect okay I can I
can point to a benign nevis that has one
of the I mean I've seen all of those
different features usually by themselves
in need I before I've seen Nev I that
are asymmetric I've seen me by that have
mitosis or that have atypia or that have
apparently abnormal maturation and the
dermis okay I've even seen patch Toit
spread and Nev I so that's the problem
and that's what makes derm path and
particularly Mele an acidic term how
hard is that there are not easy rules or
firm hard and fast rules that you can
use all of the rules by putting air
quotes you can't see it but I'm putting
air quotes around the word rules all of
the the rules can be broken okay and you
can also have melanomas that don't have
some of the features that we're going to
discuss today usually they'll have at
least one or multiple of those features
but not always they're not some
melanomas look symmetric symmetrical and
are not asymmetric okay so I think it's
important to just remember that these
are general guidelines and when you see
these things stop and think about
melanoma but you have to put the entire
microscopic picture together all the
different data points and you have to
put together the clinical scenario and
make sure it makes sense is it a
one-year-old baby then it's probably not
a melanoma it's not that little babies
can't get melanomas they are extremely
rare but it has been reported okay
is it a ninety year old person and you
think that this is a really large nevis
on their scalp and they're really sun
damaged well could it be yep possibly
but there's a really good chance that
you're dealing with the melanoma instead
so you have to use the clinical scenario
and make sure that the diagnosis that
you want to make makes sense and that's
true I think in all of pathology
particularly in Durham path particularly
in Malaya
okay so that with all those caveats
let's go back to the features so we
talked about asymmetry where one side of
the lesion looks very different from the
other side of the lesion and I just
recently learned I'm reading a textbook
right now about Niva and melanoma and
it's written by Guido Massey and Phila
bla and it's a wonderful book I'm not
paid to say this I just think it's
really great and one thing that they
pointed out is that asymmetry of pigment
when you have a lot of pigment on one
half of the lesion and not as much
pigment on the other half of lesion that
can also be a sign to make you wonder
about the possibility of melanoma so
that's something I had not learned
before and I'm still learning new things
about mullion acidic lesions all the
time all right so enough you're probably
saying enough of this low power stuff
show me high power well you don't really
need high power in this case to see that
there is unbelievable amount of Paget
I'd spread okay Paget's would spread
refers to the scattering of melanocytes
which normally live in in normal skin
the melanocytes normally live along the
basal layer of the epidermis oh you I'm
sorry you can't see the basal layer on
the video there they normally live down
here along the basal layer in normal
skin and if you need a refresher on
normal skin histology I've got a video
on that too and you can check that out
I'll put a link in the upper right-hand
corner of this video as well okay and so
that's where I'm only on sites normally
live and Nev I the melanocytes begin to
come together and make nests those nests
are also usually located down at the
basal layer at the bottom of the
epidermis when we start seeing a
significant number of melanocytes
scattering or spreading up into the
upper reaches of the epidermis into the
spinous layer or even up to the granular
layer or beyond we have to think about
melanoma okay and we say Padgett wait
because this is a similar pattern that
we see in Paget's disease of the nipple
or an extra mammary pageant disease
where we have malignant glandular type
epithelial cells that are scattering and
spreading upwards into the epidermis
also remember that other tumors can have
Paget or spreads squamous cell carcinoma
in situ is actually the most common
tumor that I see in my practice with
Paget widespread I see Paget own spread
in squamous cell carcinoma almost
everyday and of course I see melanomas
almost every day as well
but it's certainly a lot more frequent I
think the cease claims and just keep
that in mind that not everything with
Patrick would spread is necessarily
melanoma okay it's not necessarily even
Malayan acidic there are other things
that have Padgett roid spread but when
we see lots of when we see a mole
anesthetic lesion with lots of
scattering of the melanocytes upwards
that's Paget widespread that's a very
strong warning sign for melanoma
now irritated Nev I sometimes can get
occasional Paget wid cells particularly
in the middle of the lesion but again
like this it would be it would be I
don't think I've ever seen a Nevis that
at this much Padgett I'd spread
personally and also the other thing that
can be helpful is as you look out the
side of the lesion here's the other side
and then show you before but if you see
Padgett widespread and scattering of
melanocytes and here we have some right
here some Padgett oh it's spread right
in here and we're way out at the edge
the periphery of the lesion so that's
also a strong warning sign okay so if
you think it looks perfect for a Nevis
and there may be one or two patches to
it cells in the middle well that might
be just an irritated Nevis or or a crow
Levi on April skin sometimes that
Padgett woods spread and so do spits Nev
I sometimes in a readme buy so again
there are lots of exceptions but when
you see tons of Padgett widespread when
you see patch hoods spread at the
periphery of the lesion those are
worrying signs for melanoma okay
and again that's why I selected this
case because it's unbelievable amount of
Paget oh it spread and you know one
thing I'll point out is unlike squamous
cell carcinoma in situ even when you
have a floor at amount of atypical
melanocytes and patch enjoyed spread
they don't usually fully replace the
epidermis I've seen occasional times
where they can almost replace it or kind
of consume it with large nests and but
but you usually will have them
intervened with there see there's pink
keratinocytes in between all of these
nests and single Paget own cells okay
and so that's a useful thing that in in
squamous site - you will usually you may
have areas that look kind of like this
but you'll also have other areas usually
a full thickness epidermal atypia and
that's a useful clue on H&E to tell
apart a squamous sites you from melanoma
okay and here again it's just it's an
amazing amount of patch Toit spread that
the patch type melanocytes are breaking
through the epidermis here
kind of even coming out into the corneal
layer we don't always see that but
sometimes we do okay and what we have
this let's look closer and see the
cytologic features so obviously
cytologic atypia is something that we
often see in melanomas okay and atypia
is can be a little bit hard to evaluate
and as Bruce smaller one of my mentors
said atypia is in the eye of the
beholder and while some people might
disagree with that I think in my
experience that's actually proven to be
true sometimes things might seem a
typical to me and one of my colleagues
might not think it looks cytologically
atypical and also it depends on the
clinical context again I've seen
congenital knee viand young kids that
have big cells that if you would put
that cell in a junctional mole an acidic
lesion in the scalp of an 80 year old
sun-damaged person I would say that's
super atypical severe atypia but if you
put it in a congenital nevus that's
obviously benign in a baby I'd say oh
that's just some random nuclear
enlargement so you do have to keep in
mind that atypia can be somewhat
subjective and the context matters but I
think here even you know medical
students and even junior trainees would
agree these cells are really atypical
they're huge way bigger than normal
melanocytes they're even bigger than the
adjacent keratinocytes they have very
large nuclei in the center and people
often talk about melanoma as having
cherry-red nucleoli but actually all
nucleoli tend to have a reddish a
reddish color to them and that's because
there are proteins ribosomal proteins
going in and fusing with ribosomal RNA
within the nucleus at least that's what
I've been told and that explains why
there's more of that kind of reddish
pink color to the nuclei but melanoma do
often have big nuclei and they're often
kind of that reddish color and we can
also see in this example here plea
amorphous and we can see that some of
the cells are very large and whereas
other tumor cells are smaller so we have
a variation of size and shape of
multiple times the largest tumor cell is
multiple times bigger than the smallest
tumor cell we also the chromatin pattern
of melanoma it can vary but a lot of
times its kind of coarse or chunky
chromatin where you'll have areas that
are pale and then blobs of darker
chromatin sometimes it can be diffusely
hyper cream
sometimes it can be very pale and
vesicular but a lot of times its kind of
a coarse horse chromatin pattern okay so
these are very atypical cells and they
are melanocytes and you can see here
that their melanocytes melanocytes
oftentimes in normal skin have a pink or
gray cytoplasm with very little if any
visible melanin pigment and again in my
normal skin histology video I talked
about that to some extent Malayan acidic
lesions oftentimes will have melanin
pigment with them but the melanin
pigment is still usually prominent in
the keratinocytes not in the melanocytes
melanocytes normally make melanin
pigment and transfer it to adjacent
keratinocytes in the basal layer that's
the normal normal physiology of
melanocytes in the skin okay but
sometimes melanocytes can make pigment
and the pigment will build up in the
cytoplasm of the of the melanocytes you
both in niva and in melanoma okay so
that's important because being able to
tell pigment that is a Melania suddenly
anaesthetic cell versus some other cell
is really important because sometimes
that will impact your ability to decide
if the tumors actually invasive or
something else so when you have a really
dense chunks of pigment a lot of times
that will indicate a cell like here in
the dermis look these dense clumps of
melanin pigment these are actually
melania phages this is melanin that's
fallen out of the epidermis into the
dermis and is eaten up by macrophages
so usually really darkly pigmented cells
tend to not be melanocytes but there are
some exceptions and here's here's one
example where you're starting to see
some of the melanocytes picking up a
fair amount or having a fair amount of
melanin building up in their cytoplasm
usually I would say when you see pigment
in melanoma cells though it looks like
this this kind of dusty or dirty
brownish gray cytoplasm so we have this
kind of grayish cytoplasm that has
little specks little stipple x' of
melanin pigment in the cytoplasm okay so
I think that's pretty helpful that
grayish cytoplasm with little fine
granules of melanin you can see that in
some examples of melanoma okay but again
all of this pigment down here
this belongs these are Emiliano phage is
not invasion so even though this melon
is really exuberant there's tons of
cells almost all of it is in the
epidermis see you can look down to the
dermis and we we see inflammation in the
dermis a host response that the
inflammation that's responding to this
overlying tumor but there's actually no
invasion of melanoma past the basement
membrane let's look here again is
another example of cytologic atypia if I
can get it into focus here huge a
typical melanocytes right along here
okay and there's a mitosis - now we'll
talk about my testes in a minute but you
have to be careful about mitosis in the
epidermal portion of amyl anesthetic
lesion okay the reason it's not that
they're not important there there have
been some some recent studies that have
shown that actually junctional mitosis
are more frequently seen in melanoma
than in me by but it's not totally
specific and part of the problem is that
how do I know that that mitosis is in a
melania site rather than a background
keratinocyte because basal keratinocytes
are supposed to divide and to divide a
cell needs to have mitosis so just
interpret mitosis in the epidermis with
caution certainly if you start seeing a
lot of them think about melanoma but
don't let that be your sole feature that
mean these very well may be in
melanocytes but it's oftentimes
difficult to tell for sure okay so if
that's the only thing we're going you is
that you've seen in mitosis in the
epidermis and otherwise the lesion looks
like a nevis stop and make sure that
that's really in a melanocytes and and
look at the other features but that by
itself would not worry me too much in
this case though obviously we have a
tibia we have Patchett widespread
asymmetry all of these other bad things
and this is clearly a melanoma but when
we're when we're counting mitosis for
prognostic staging of melanomas we do
not count them all the mitosis that are
in the insight to component in the
epidermis we only count the mitosis that
are in dermal invasive melanocytes okay
and we'll talk more about that in a
minute so anyway this is an example of a
melanoma that shows marked cytologic
atypia a unbelievable amount of patch
joint spread and asymmetry all of which
are features of melanoma I would
classified
probably as a superficial spreading
melanoma so there historically are four
major subtypes of melanoma superficial
spreading acryl indigenous lent ago
malignant nodular and now in modern
times we've accepted a variety of
additional patterns or subtypes that we
see but those are the four classic
patterns those are useful because they
all show different features they have
different clinical features they often
have different molecular features
underneath them but the individual
subtype doesn't really impact the
prognosis of the melanoma the most
important prognostic factor for melanoma
is if it's invasive and how deep the
invasion goes the breslow depth or
breslow thickness of the tumor okay
which is the measurement in invasive
melanomas that's the most important
prognostic factor for melanoma
regardless of what type of melanoma it
is but most of the subtyping is done
kind of for historical reasons I know
plenty of dermatologists that do not
usually provide a subtype I still tend
to because the dermatologists and
surgeons that I work with are still
interested to know if it's a superficial
spreading or linked to go malignant or a
crawl into genus or or whatever so I
usually will put those when I can when
I'm not sure of what subtype that I just
say unclassified and that's just my
personal approach to how I handle
melanoma diagnosis in my practice this
is actually an acro lentigines melanoma
and it is on acryl skin as you can see
and this melanoma on acryl skin shows
again a dramatic amount of Paget I'd
spread okay lots of single melanocytes
that are atypical and have kind of a
grayish pink cytoplasm and they're
spreading all the way up scattering all
the way up into the even all the way up
to the granule layer and into the
corneal layer where they then die and
get kind of trapped in the dead keratin
and you can see that there are also some
nests that are Paget I'd whole nests
that are breaking free from the basal
layer of the skin and spreading upwards
into the epidermis okay so some people
described this as a buckshot pattern
also where it looks like a like a
shotgun shot upwards into the epidermis
and sprayed individual little pellets of
buckshot into the
epidermis okay so that's again dramatic
patch toys spread remember that acryl
NIMH I sometimes will have Paget
widespread and occasionally it can even
be pronounced but we see other things
here this is very psychologically
atypical we have really large nucleoli
kind of that see if I can find it here
we have large atypical nucleo nuclei
with prominent nucleoli and look what we
also have here's a nest that's actually
down I think in the papillary dermis and
look what we have right in the middle we
have a mitosis so dermal my toesies are
another worrisome finding in Malayan
acidic lesions particularly if there are
many mitosis particularly if they are a
typical mitotic figures like tri-polar
mitosis or or asymmetric mitosis that
that look atypical and also particularly
if you see mitosis in the deep aspect
the down in the deep dermal portion of a
thick milan acidic lesion okay so I've
definitely seen neva on a regular basis
that might have one mitosis particularly
in the the superficial dermal portion of
the lesion but if you start seeing
multiple mitosis that's a time to stop
and worry about melanoma particularly if
you have a tibia Paget oh and spread
other features if I have an atypical
mole anesthetic lesion that I'm worried
about melanoma and then I see a dermal
mitosis that usually is kind of a
feature that will push me over the edge
into deciding yes this is melanoma if
I'm on the line and uncertain having a
mitosis in addition to other a typical
features it's very helpful I mean
obviously a case like this once you have
some experience enduring path this from
the second you put this slide on the
scope you said this is going to be a
melanoma it's a pretty easy really
really classic dramatic example okay and
here another thing we can look at this
case and talk about is maturation okay
maturation is somewhat of a complicated
topic to talk about let's get at a lower
power here what we generally see an even
again go back to the nevis video if
you've not watched it yet is we see that
as when we have a metastatic lesion that
has a dermal component either
compound nevis or an intradermal nevis
if we look at the melanocytes in the
superficial dermis the papillary dermis
will usually find larger melanocytes
that have more abundant cytoplasm and
are arranged in larger nests as we go
deeper down into the dermis the
melanocytes themselves get smaller they
have less cytoplasm their nuclei tend to
get smaller and the nests that they're
in tend to get smaller and even the
cells start getting arranged as little
single cells that trickle down into the
dermis so that pattern is called
maturation or zonation some people say
and this the term maturation goes all
the way back to I believe dr. Oona in
the eighteen late 1800s came up with
this idea and the theory was that me buy
starred as junctional things and then
move down into the dermis and mature and
we now I think biologically understand
that that's not actually what's
happening in niva but the term
maturation is so widely used and
understood in their path that we still
use it even though it's probably not
technically accurate at a scientific
level okay but it certainly is a useful
tool morphologically to determine if
you're dealing with or to one of the
points that you can use to determine if
you're dealing with a melanoma or a
nevis so at first glance this lesion may
seem to have maturation
it's got large nests of large cells up
here and as you go deeper the nests and
the cells seem to get a little bit
smaller so this is again why maturation
even though we find it useful it's
sometimes kind of complicated because
it's not as easy to evaluate
particularly for beginning pathologists
but I'll tell you one thing that I find
really helpful is obviously if you see
large nests of large cells down to the
deep part of a lesion that is one
feature that might be worrisome for
melanoma and I'll go look closer for
other things but what we can see here
this again is obvious there's cytologic
atypia very atypical melanocytes here
they're large they have kind of hyper
cremation some of them we see mitotic
figures multiple layers of mitosis over
here but look as we go down even though
the nest gets smaller the melanocytes
are still very large and atypical and
they have nuclei even down here at the
deep part I feel like that's one helpful
thing if I have a lesion that looks kind
of funny and I look down at the deepest
portion of the lesion deepest portion of
the milena
a lesion in the deep dermis or deeper
down in the dermis and look at the
nuclei if the nuclei are still large and
there are still prominent nucleoli even
down deep to me that's a sign that maybe
the lesion doesn't have normal
maturation so even though it does seem
to get a little the cells get a little
smaller and the nests get smaller we
still have pretty atypical cells and
pretty large cells down here at the deep
aspect of the lesion and also you may
have noticed we passed over a couple
mitosis here's one right here again so
we have multiple dermal mitosis in the
dermal melanocytes in this case and it
can also be a little challenging
sometimes to tell if the dermal
melanocytes are I'm sorry the dermal
mitosis are actually in melanocytes or
not if you see you know sometimes
mitosis will if there's a lot of
inflammation you can see mitotic figures
in the inflammatory cells or in dividing
endothelial cells if there's some
granulation tissue or reactive vessels
around but here when you see a mitosis
that's right in the middle of a nest of
melanocytes there's no doubt about that
that's a mitosis in a dermal melanocytes
and that is a very worrisome sign for
melanoma when there are many of them and
when there are other atypical features
present so again here we are down at the
deepest aspect of the lesion and as we
look along we still see pretty large
very atypical cells even down here at
the deep aspect and I think here's an
area where I thought somewhere on here
there was a good area that yeah here's
an area I think that's helpful to see
this looking in the papillary dermis
here we see large nests of large cells
and as we go down they still tend to be
pretty large even as we move down into
the dermis still large cells still large
nests they do start to trickle out down
here and again that could give you the
impression that there's normal
maturation at low power but at higher
power these cells are clearly a typical
big nucleoli large nuclei a typical
nuclei even down at the deep aspect of
the lesion so maturation is a helpful
feature but it only works on lesions
where you have a dermal component of
melanocytes you can't use that the word
maturation when you're talking about
junctional nevis versus melanoma insight
okay so in those kinds of cases you only
can look at the epidermal features the
features that that Milan aesthetic
lesions have in the epidermis maturation
only works if there's a dermal component
okay so you can't use that rule when
you're trying to decide something to
melanoma in sites who or nothing all
right so that's another example of a
tibia of Paget I spread and of abnormal
maturation in a melanoma
now here's a scar this is a dermal scar
and the reason is that this is a
melanoma that was biopsied and then the
margins were positive and and they came
back and they did a wide local excision
around it and here's the residual
melanoma that's left over here and again
this is just an example of really
dramatic Paget would spread with lots of
atypical melanocytes scattering upwards
into the superficial aspect of the
epidermis and this is in this melanoma
doesn't have much pigment at all right
the cells are very pale grayish
cytoplasm and this is a little bit older
slide that's a touch faded but still you
can tell that there's really no melanin
pigment production here okay so when the
melanin pigment is present it's helpful
and actually even though I've just said
that now I've been proven wrong when you
look really close I don't know if it'll
pick up on the video there are actually
really tiny little little bits and
pieces of melanin in some of these cells
very subtle and focal and if you have
doubts in a case like this and you're
not sure if these are melanocytes or not
you know it's Padgett I'd you know it's
a typical you know it must be malignant
but you're not sure are these
melanocytes or could this be Patras
disease could this be screaming site - I
think much much of the time you can
decide that on H and E alone but when
you need help you can use Melania setec
markers to help sort out that
differential so mark one or sox10 will
stay in the melanocytes but will be
negative in Paget or squamous cell
carcinoma in situ and in Paget's disease
of the nipple or extra memory patches
disease so you can use a variety of
different immuno stains to help you here
again is a nice example of nuclear
atypia with a really large Melina site
with a huge nucleolus and then that's a
nice example of Paget widespread
so this is another another example of a
superficial spreading pattern of
melanoma in this case is actually just
melanoma in situ and most of the time
for melanoma insight to I just say
melanoma in situ and I don't actually
put down a subtype with the exception of
the lent to go malignus subtype because
those do tend to spread farther to the
side and oftentimes require a wider
margin or more stages on Mohs surgery if
Moses being used and so I think a lot of
times the the treating physicians like
to know that information so when I have
leant to go malignant even on a melanoma
insight you I do tend to say that I
think and that's just my my personal
practice
all right so here's another example of a
melanoma natural skin and this this
really dark stuff here by the way this
is just an air air bubble underneath the
slide that's right on top of the carrots
insights it's not important so if you're
if you're a beginner watching this just
know that's all that is if you see that
real dark line it's not not melanin this
stuff the dark stuff you're seeing here
that's actually melanin okay so here's
an acro lesion a large acro lesion on
the sole of the foot okay well we can
see right here actually in the dermis
there's a nevis here so this knee this
has probably been present for a long
time all of these cells in the dermis
they're they're maturing nicely they're
starting up here and then going down a
maturing and getting smaller but in the
epidermis we see something else going on
we see some Paget widespread which you
can have in a crow Levi but we also see
pretty large atypical melanocytes here
and in acryl sites what I like to see to
make a diagnosis of a crawl and TJ's
melanoma ideally I like to see severe
cytologic atypia and confluent growth
now we don't always get that and
sometimes the edges of a large acryl
intentionally Noma if they biopsy near
the edge it can sometimes be very subtle
and so this is why on acryl pigmented
lesions I really like to know the size
of the lesion if they're biopsy a really
tiny lesion and the biopsy probably is
showing most of of what of the lesion
clinically you know it's lesions three
or four millimeters and they've done a
shave biopsy or a punch biopsy well in
that case then I feel pretty reassured
that what I'm dealing was probably not a
melanoma it's not that you cannot have
small melanomas you can but on acryl
skin the thing that worries me is that
I'm getting a small biopsy of a large
lesion so if you're a dermatologist
watching this or a family doc or anybody
who does biopsies please please please
remember this one thing if you're going
to biopsy Moline aesthetic lesions
either try to biopsy the whole lesion or
if you think that you should need to
take about a partial biopsy of a big
lesion sometimes that's needed I would
caution against it unless you absolutely
have to but in that case please tell the
pathologist put it on the requisition
sheet this is a partial biopsy of a
three centimeter plaque on the bottom of
the foot that
black that is incredibly helpful
information for us and can help help
save the patient and everyone involved
from a potential misdiagnosis okay so on
a crawl on a chrome will an aesthetic
things I like to know the size and make
sure I'm not missing something in any
case this is a big excision because this
was already a biopsy proven melanoma so
there was Nevis there but there's also
melanoma melanomas arise in neve i on a
relatively regular basis i mean the risk
of a Nevis turning the melanoma is very
low people most people have multiple
Niva and most people do not ever get
melanoma so the risk is low but we do
see melanoma next to neve i on a regular
basis in my practice okay the reason I'm
showing this is the acryl intense
melanoma is the best type of melanoma to
show confluent growth okay so confluent
growth is a feature that we look at as
worrisome animal an aesthetic lesion
niba usually have individual either
either nests or sometimes single
melanocytes in the epidermal junction at
the dirt of the basal layer but they're
spaced out from one another by normal
intervening keratinocytes okay that's
the way normal melanocytes grow and
that's the way Neve I tend to grow
melanoma sometimes though will grow over
grow in the epidermis and sometimes they
spread upwards and that's Paget joy
spread and sometimes they spread out to
the sides and replace the basal layer
with melanocytes they push the
keratinocytes out of the way and we call
that confluence or conflagration
it can be kind of challenging to
evaluate microscopically it's easy for
us enduring path to talk about that
feature but it's actually kind of hard I
think to pick up on how to how to
diagnose it so I think that acro
melanomas are usually show really
dramatic confluent growth and so they're
a good place to start when we're talking
about this pattern okay so here and this
again I told you earlier that usually
they're really darkly pigmented cells
are not melanocytes well here's me being
proven wrong sometimes they are I feel
like acryl melanomas have a tendency to
have more pigment I don't know if that's
really true but in my experience they
seem to up more often be darkly
pigmented melanocytes then than other
types of melanomas so up here we have
some Paget or cells and along the basal
layer here these guys even though they
have a lot of pigment these are actually
all
melanocytes and if you did a stain for
Mart one or Sox ten they'd almost all be
positive and they've basically
completely replaced the basal layer like
there are almost no keratinocytes left
in here all you see are melanocytes with
very maybe there's a rare keratinocyte
left in here but almost the entire basal
layer is replaced by atypical
melanocytes that's called confluent
growth and that's a worrisome sign for
melanoma particularly if it's really
prominent sometimes an irritated nieve
eye or particularly Nev eye that have
been biopsied and then re grown over top
of the scar recurrent Nev eye they can
have pretty striking confluent growth
and yet are still benign so again every
single rule I'm going to teach you here
today is going to have possible times
when it can be broken okay so recurrent
Nev I can look and also really irritated
or scratched excoriated and Eve eye that
have regrown into the epidermis over top
of the area of injury they can have what
looks like confluent but a confluent
growth but here we have mark cytologic
atypia and other features for melanoma
but this solid line of melanocytes
replacing the basal layer that's
confluent growth and that's a really
helpful feature for melanoma okay and as
I think is like the best example of
confluent growth in my collection let's
see if I can find the other area without
the slide falling here I'm going to turn
it around
ah here
this is a really great example really
dramatic example so the confluent growth
starts down here in the rear edges and
moves all the way up the side of the
Reedy
all the way along here so down here the
melanocytes don't have much pigment up
here they do but they're all melanocytes
and if you did a stain it would prove
that and you can see a solid line of a
typical melanocytes basically replacing
the entire basal layer of the epidermis
okay so that's going to fluent growth
and that is a really helpful feature
when it's present for melanoma now I
often times melanomas don't have
confluent growth so just because it
doesn't have confluent growth doesn't
mean that it's benign but if you see
confluent girth you should be really
worried about the possibility of
melanoma okay and again these have
really large nucleoli they're atypical
cytologically it's a little hard to see
the nucleoli or the nuclei and the
nuclear features and some of them
because of all the extra melanin pigment
that they have but they're quite
atypical alright and one thing that's
helpful a helpful clue for confluent
growth is this what's happening here is
the epidermis looks like it's separating
from the dermis it's like a blister
almost like a little a little
sub-epidermal cleft or separation looks
almost like what we see in small
blisters in in inflammatory bolas
dermatitis ease so if you see a blister
again I'm using air quotes here if you
see a blister what looks like a blister
or a cleft or like the epidermis is
unzipping itself from the underlying
dermis in the midst of amyl an aesthetic
lesion that you have to think about
melanoma until you can prove otherwise
because that's a worrisome sign and what
this is is an artifact and my
understanding of why this probably
happens is that there are so many
melanocytes growing along here pushing
the keratinocytes out of the way that
when we process the tissue in formalin
and the other chemicals we use to fix
the tissue there's sometimes some
shrinkage of the tissue and the
epidermis normally is held tightly to
the dermis by the Hemi desmosomes and
all of their adhesion molecules that
hook on to the basement membrane we
don't have that here because most of the
keratinocytes have been pushed out of
the way by melanocytes melanocytes do
not have those same adhesion molecules
they do not attach down to the basement
membrane
so the epidermis starts to cleft and
lift away so this is not like an actual
blister in the patient it's a artifact
that we see microscopically kind of like
the cleft an artifact that we see in
basal cell carcinomas it's an artifact
but it's a useful artifact because it's
a clue to confluent growth and it's a
clue to melanoma in the context of a
mole anesthetic lesion okay so when you
see that now I've seen times where
there's splits like this that are just
due to tears in the tissue or something
so it's not that every time you see this
cleft it's always melanoma but you
should really stop and think about
melanoma when you see this sign right
here the unzipping sign or the the
melania static blistering sign it's an
artifact that's really useful
okay so confluent growth like I said is
often not nearly as dramatic as we see
in this case of acro melanoma but I
think this is a good example of a really
classic really ideal example of
confluence and here's more of it over
here with that same look again that
blistering artifact or the unzipping
sign where the epidermis and the dermis
are starting to separate from one
another because of overgrowth of the
melanocytes replacing the basal layer
keratinocytes another feature that you
can use when you're trying to decide if
something is confluent is look for the
egg Naxal structures and this again is
particularly true in acryl indigenous
melanomas they have this really strong
tendency to grow down the eccrine ducts
and so here's a necron duct and there a
way I can tell is it's a little a little
structure made of keratinocyte like
cells and in the center there's a little
tiny hole that you can barely see here
and it's lined by a little pink cuticle
you just barely see it so we're cut kind
of at an angle so you can't see a
perfect empty lumen in the middle but
this is a duct and look what these are
the these are the the epithelial cells
of the duct that look a lot like
keratinocytes and then around the
outside we have large atypical
melanocytes completely wrapping and
replacing the basal layer of the ductal
epithelial cells so sometimes when you
can't when you're not sure if there's
confluent growth in the epidermis
looking and seeing if you're having
single-cell confluent growth down the
eccrine ducts are down here follicles
can be incredibly useful and I've
definitely had times where that feature
was what helped me make the diagnosis of
melanoma in this case I think has some
other examples let me find
we find another place here's another
duct and now that one you definitely can
see there's a nice lumen in the middle
there so this is an echo in duct and
again it's not completely wrapped by a
typical melanocytes but you can
definitely see single atypical
melanocytes that are spreading down into
the duct and replacing the basal layer
and sometimes they can be so florid that
they can replace most of the epithelial
cells in the sweat duct okay and in that
case they can kind of be mistaken for
invasion actually you can like look at
this here you could say oh this is a
nest of invasive melanoma well actually
there are probably some keratinocytes or
I'm sorry some epithelial cells left in
there so this is probably actually
incite to spread down a duct so you
wouldn't want to measure that as an
invasive area in a melanoma
now this melanoma has other areas like
this that are definitely invasive we see
atypical melanocytes that are invading
the dermis and again it's a little hard
here because look at all the pigment and
a lot of these really darkly pigmented
cells are actually Melania phages
whereas these cells that have a little
bit more of that dirty grayish cytoplasm
even though they have some pigment
they're not nearly like as these are
like so dark brown that they almost look
black these are Ileana phages these are
melanocytes sometimes the nuclear
features can help you sometimes seeing
the grayish cytoplasm can help if you're
really struggling to tell if the dermal
cells are melanocytes versus Melania
phages do an immuno stain and that can
really help solve the problem and that's
really important because if they're just
Melania phages then you might have a
melanoma in sight - but no invasive
growth and if they're Malaya melanoma
cells in the dermis and then you have
invasion and that's going to change the
treatment and potentially change the
prognosis for the patient so it's
important to make that distinction
here's another example of a duct kind of
funny where we've got here's the
epithelial cells in the middle and a
typical melanocytes are on the outside
one other thing I guess that I'll say
before we move on about confluent growth
is that it doesn't always it doesn't
always work so so clearly as I showed in
the previous area but what I start to
worry about is that a lot of times Nev I
will have nests of melanocytes down the
tips of ridi and when I start to see
single melanocytes crawling up in
between
the inter ad space the area over top of
the dermal papilla over or the papillae
if we're saying multiple if you start to
see a lot of melanocytes filling this
space in here that starts to worry me
that we're getting into confluent growth
now that's a again that's kind of a
subtle thing that can be hard to
interpret I definitely see some single
melanocytes in the inner reading space
in benign IVA on a regular basis but if
that's one thing I look for if I'm
having a hard time with the lesion I
start looking and seeing are there very
many cells growing in that space because
again that's the idea that the that the
melanocytes are starting to get a little
bit too rambunctious and are growing
upwards and starting to replace parts of
the basal layer so like here look at
this we're starting to see single single
single melanocytes kind of coming in
here by itself that's not enough for
melanoma I think but it's a sign that
makes me start to wonder and worry a
little bit and then over here I know
it's upside down but you can again see
complete replacement of the basal layer
by atypical melanocytes and that's
obvious confluent growth so I hope that
helps you understand confluence a little
bit better and I admit it's kind of a
tricky topic but if you do an immuno
stain what it'll look like is like a kid
took a crayon and color it a solid line
right along the basal layer it just
completely replaces most of the basal
layer of the epidermis when you have
really dramatic influence
now look here's an example where the
entire epidermis is basically missing
and this is also from a kernel scanning
this is a large worrisome lesion
clinically a punch biopsy was done
because it was so large that it wouldn't
have been feasible to remove the whole
thing thankfully the dermatologist was
very clear about that and said that this
is a partial biopsy have a large
worrisome lesion and here you can see
one little fragment of epidermis but
it's totally detached so it's hard to
evaluate I'm only an aesthetic lesion
when the whole epidermis is gone right
because I can't look for Paget
widespread really I can't look for
confluent growth but wouldn't I see on a
typical mistake lesion if then this is
not a common finding but when I see
something like this that instantly
worries me that maybe there's confluent
growth that's so confluent that the
whole epidermis has artefactual II
detached during processing of the tissue
and is floated away and look we can see
a typical melanocytes right in this
space where the basal layer would have
been but we just can't see any epidermis
with it certainly the cytologic there's
cytologic atypia down in the dermal
component to some degree but the cells
also kind of have a little bit of an e
void appearance I kind of have an e this
like look so it could be really
challenging and here it matters because
look how thick this lesion is it goes
down into the dermis so if this is
melanoma versus iniba sets a big
difference for the patient here look
what we have right here
it's a little bit hard to see on this
section but right here's a sweat duct
and there's a little tiny lumen in the
middle and if I did a keratin stain
those cells in the center would stain
and around the outside we have complete
wrapping of the duct with very atypical
melanocytes so this is confluent growth
all the way down and we're way down in
the dermis look at this it's really
amazing to me how acryl melanomas tend
to do this we're way down here and we
have actually this is not invasive but
melanoma insight to within the sweat
duct empathy Liam so here that actually
is a feature that would really be
helpful and confirming the diagnosis but
look the other piece actually shows us
that what we suspect that is exactly
what's happening here is the Malayan
acidic lesion and you can see this cleft
this split the blister here which is
artefactual from the confluent growth of
melanocytes along the dermal epidermal
Junction and there is cytologic atypia
there really hyper chromatic atypical
melanocytes and there's Paget widespread
lots of Paget widespread and if we look
over here to the side this area is not
quite as dramatic but we do begin to see
some single cells moving up in the inner
ridi space along the basal layer in the
space between Reedy ridges and look what
else we see here's an acro syringe ium
this is the the swirly spirally opening
of where the eccrine duct deposits sweat
out onto the skin surface and there it's
the best place to see them as a natural
skin they're really dramatic there and
look what we have right below it we have
the sweat duct here's the lumen of the
duct right here it's got a little hole
there there's a little pink lining and
what's this all melanoma cells
completely replacing the basal layer and
most of the epithelium of the sweat duct
so this is what what we saw on the other
piece this is what it looks like up at
the top the cells have tracked all the
way down that duct way down into the
deep dermis and so again finding that is
a really helpful clue for melanoma so
all of this here is invasive melanoma
and I've even occasionally I don't think
this case has but I've even occasionally
seen melanoma insight 2 all the way down
into ekron coils way down and it's
important again to recognize if it's
actually in the sweat ducts or glands
that's in sight - that's not invasion
you don't want to measure that okay that
will give you a deeper breslow than is
actually real here's an example again of
complete separation of the epidermis
from the dermis a complete looks like a
sub-epidermal blister but it's all do
it's an artifact due to that confluent
melanocytes
a typical melanocytes in the dermis and
this is the one where we have dramatic
insight to melanoma all the way down
here here's the duct cut kind of at a
funny angle so that's why it looks like
it's got little septation there it's
actually just a swirly kind of spiral of
the duct that's cut funny all of this is
melanoma insight to replacing it and in
this case is a little odd that in
addition to melanoma it's likely there
actually are single cells of invasive
melanoma that have also tracked along
the duct out in the dermis though
they're out in the dermis so outside of
the the epithelium so there's both
insight to an invasive melanoma around
these ducts which is kind of weird but
it's a really really great example
though of how dramatically you can have
melanoma in sites you spread down ducks
in a confluent fashion and that can
really help make the diagnosis of
melanoma in challenging cases so breslow
depth is normally measured the way we
measure it is we measure from the top of
the granular layer so not the top of the
corneal layer but the top of the
granular layer and we measure all the
way down to the deepest part of melanoma
so we'd start here and we measure down
here and usually we have an eyepiece
that you can't see on the screen but
that we can see here sitting at the
microscope it's a micrometer and in the
ocular of the microscope that lets us
measure and we report it in millimeters
and in a case like this where there's an
artifact xual split I would make a
measurement from here to here and I
might measure several areas this area
over here actually is probably deeper
and in fact since we had stuff down deep
we probably could measure all the way
here but that's a little bit more
complicated just for the point of it say
this was the deepest part of the lesion
you would start at the granule layer you
would go down to the deepest place in
the lesion and if
have an artifact like this a little
split subtract that amount out because
that's not really there in the patient
so if there's that might be a little a
little tiny area that it won't really
change much but I usually will subtract
that out if there's an artifact like
that okay so you measure from the top of
the granule layer to the deepest point
of invasion and again stuff like this is
not usually seen in melanoma it's kind
of complicated so we won't really go
into how to deal with that all right but
anyway that's the basics of breslow
that's the basics of confluent growth a
really good example now this is changing
gears a little bit here we have a biopsy
of a pigmented lesion from the face of
an elderly person and you can tell it's
probably the face because there's lots
of large sebaceous glands and prominent
hair follicles okay so as patients age
they tend to get prominent sebaceous
glands and sebaceous hyperplasia on
their face but this is a dark lesion in
the patient's old and sun-damaged okay
so clinically they're concerned is this
length ago or a seborrheic keratosis or
is this an atypical nevis or is this a
melanoma on the sun-damaged face of old
people my my thought process is if I see
melanocytes there I want to think about
melanoma until I can prove that it's not
it's not that you can't have me by on
the face of old sun damage people you
can but it's far more worrisome that I'm
gonna miss a melanoma if I'm not being
cautious because sometimes the melanomas
that occur on sun damaged elderly skin
particularly on the head and neck can be
very subtle at first glance and so this
type of melanoma is called leant to go
it's called that because it
looks a lot like solar Lent ago
clinically but it behaves if you leave
it alone for many years it will often
behave badly sometimes it can can behave
badly even more more rapidly but a lot
of times it will grow for a long time
and then eventually become aggressive so
what we see in this case there's a lot
of pigment right well solar lens ago
would look like that too it can have
elongated Reedy that are hyper pigmented
so when you see these it's important to
look a little more closely if you see
nests or a significant number of
atypical melanocytes you should be very
worried about the possibility
of melanoma insights UK Lent ago
malignant and one thing that helps me is
if I see this I see kind of a jumbling
of grayish looking cells along the basal
layer and it can be quite hard in cases
that have a lot of pigment like this one
but here when I start seeing an
increased number of cells that are kind
of large and of gray cytoplasm that
worries me now if that's all I had here
doing an immuno stain would be
potentially very useful and I personally
like to use sox10 and I like the red
chromatin if you're able to have that
because it will help you in cases like
this where there's lots of brown pigment
it'll help you to distinguish what's
true staining of melanocytes nuclei
versus background pigment okay but if
you don't have that MIT f also works
although I only personally like to use
MIT F if for melanoma in situ and I
don't ever like to use it for invasive
melanoma or metastatic melanoma because
it's relatively nonspecific in my
experience it will often stain
histiocytes so if you have MIT f I think
it works okay for melanoma in situ but I
don't like to use it for melanoma in any
other context personally I think it's
actually kind of dangerous and to look
at lymph nodes or distant Mets and try
to use MIT F there so anyway we can have
another video about mo Lian acidic
immuno stains but I personally like
sox10 Mart ones okay too but it will
stain the the dendritic processes of
melanocytes and it can tend to make you
over-interpret how many melanocytes are
there so see down here we're starting to
see actually little clusters of single
melanocytes even though they're darkly
pigmented or blend it in with darkly
pigmented keratinocytes there probably
are melanocytes down here when an immuno
stain indeed actually confirmed that you
can see here we're starting to get
little clusters so again what I'm
showing you though on H and E here is is
kind of challenging but the reason I'm
going to show you this one is a so that
you remember that lent ago malignant can
be very subtle sometimes and hard to
tell and B there are some clues that
help number one look down the neck so
look at this this is a hair follicle and
what are all these gray atypical cells
this is all melanoma
these are melanoma and site two cells
they're not nearly as pigmented as the
ones at the junction but they're growing
all the way down replacing the basal
layer of the hair follicle even
spreading out into the sebaceous glands
completely in confluent growth pattern
all the way way down into this follicle
look we're still still going down here
all of that stuff all melanoma insights
you all of this melanoma insights is
spreading out into a sebaceous gland now
sometimes you can see nests of
melanocytes like in congenital knee by
that are in the middle of a sebaceous
gland or a hair follicle but when you
see single-cell growth of a typical
melanocytes down a hair follicle or down
sweat ducts replacing the basal layer
that's a worrisome site particularly if
you're looking at a pigmented mole
anesthetic lesion from elderly sun
damaged skin and look you can see the
same thing happening over here it's not
nearly as dramatic but there are
atypical melanocytes spreading down here
and spreading over here and so this is
extra evidence of confluent growth the
lenta go malignant type of melanoma
insight too doesn't have as dramatic of
confluent growth much of the time it's
often kind of skippy growth where you'll
see nests and single cells and then
spaces with very little melanocytes and
then more melanocytes and it keeps kind
of skipping all the way along and it's
usually kind of broad and we'll go from
one end of the biopsy to the other
oftentimes let's look at this piece down
here
so here again is an example of a hair
follicle and sebaceous gland with
melanoma insight to tracking down into
the NEX Aleppo thulium and here this is
more obvious here at the junction we
actually are starting to see nests and
zones of confluent growth of the
melanocytes and once you if you think
you've got a solar lens to go but you
start seeing nests actual nests of
melanocytes is not a solar lens ago
there may be a solar lens to go there
also but you have to think once you have
nest of melanocytes you have a mole
anesthetic lesion either it's a nevis
and maybe this person's had a little
nevis their their whole life and now
they're old and sun damage or it's a
melanoma and so that's the kind of time
we got to be really careful and i
personally find that immuno stains can
be helpful although you have to learn
how to use them because sun damaged skin
tends to have an increased number of
kind of large melanocytes as a kind of
Malayan acidic hyperplasia that gets
induced by chronic UV exposure from the
Sun and so you do have to be careful any
old Sun damaged person is going to have
more melanocytes and larger melanocytes
than a younger non sun damaged person so
you have to get used to how to interpret
the immuno stains in that setting and if
you're watching this in your say you're
in private practice and don't see a lot
of dirt path take some some skin from a
basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma
excision where you know there's not
probably going to be any melanoma just
background skin and do a sox10 stain on
a few cases to get an idea of oh wow
this is the density of melanocytes in
that you see a lot of times an old Sun
damaged skin so I think that's helpful
and that can give you kind of a
threshold or help you set your threshold
for for what is an allowable amount of
melanocytes versus what's worrisome I
think the most important thing to me is
if I do see zones of confluence if I see
patchy skippy areas if I see nests and
also if I see a tibia all those things
can help me so this is a length ago
malignant Sall melanoma in situ in this
case is the lens to go malignant pattern
and these often are kind of broad and
spread widely and so it can be sometimes
hard to get clear margins on them and
here's an example it's not from the same
case but here's a nice example actually
of the staining that you can see in lens
ago malignant okay this is actually a
mark one stain it was a
again it sustained I don't personally
like to use very often looking for
melanoma inside too it's useful I think
in if you're looking at lymph nodes or
metastatic lesions sometimes or if
you're looking for invasion it can be
helpful for insight too I prefer sox10
personally but it's still a good example
there's Paget widespread there and look
out here at the periphery this is the
reason that I think you got to be a
little careful when you use mark 1 look
what we have here you can see there's
strong staining of a cytoplasm but look
also the melanocytes have little
branching dendritic processes that's
what they normally use to feed melanin
that they produce into their neighboring
keratinocytes but what happens here is
it makes each single melanocytes a lot
bigger and kind of broader than it is
actually because it of its cytoplasmic
processes so it can the mark one stain
can make it look like there are more
melanocytes there than there actually
are in the sox10 or MIT F nuclear stains
we'll just show you the nucleus of each
cell and I think it's a little easier to
kind of quantify how many cells are
really there but sometimes it still
works because you have areas like this
where there's obviously prominent Paget
which spread and the basal layer is
basically completely replaced by a
typical melanocytes so this is melanoma
and lens ago malignant sometimes will
have Paget Toit spread oftentimes it
doesn't though or has very little so
don't expect to always see Paget
widespread for a limb to go malignant
and then here's an area where there is
actually a couple little tiny nests of
dermal invasion and so the Mart one help
can help pick that up if you're if
you've got a lot of inflammation or
background regression changes or at one
can sometimes be helpful to show you a
subtle focal invasion that's kind of
hiding in the background so that's an
example of what immunostaining again
I'll make a video in the future I think
showing immuno stands firmly on
aesthetic lesions in more more detail
now what I want to show for this lesion
here here's a melanoma
again we've got focal areas like this
I've confluent growth areas where
there's melanocytes replacing much of
the basal layer and spreading in between
reading but why I wash to this case is
because this is an example of regression
change okay regression is this kind of
response that happens in the dermis
under a melanoma and it the theory is
that the melanoma invaded into that area
of the dermis and then the immune system
destroyed part of the melanoma and then
kind of scar tissue inflammation filled
in that space now in reality just
because an area looks like regression
doesn't necessarily mean there was there
used to be invasive melanoma there
sometimes we see regression like changes
under melanoma in situ in fact I see
that relatively often and I'm not
totally sure that every single one of
those cases definitely had invasion
that's now regressed it may just be kind
of a robust form of host immune system
host response against the tumor that's
happened but the point is when I see
this and see a significant amount of it
I like to report it and it's one of the
things that in the prognostic parameters
that we often report for melanomas
although the significance is somewhat
debatable people have argued that it's a
bad thing or that maybe it's a good
thing and there have been people that
have argued back and forth so if I see
it I usually will mention it in my
report but I think and I think it's an
important feature to recognize in
melanomas what we usually see in
regression are three things we see
disorganized collagen bundles collagen
fibers we see lymphocytic we see
inflammation usually lymphocytes and
sometimes histiocytes and we often see
pigment drop out or pigment incontinence
emollient of phages so here this
disorganized pattern of collagen fibers
with intermingled lymphocytes and
occasional melania phages - this is a
good example of I think regression
change and sometimes there can be
bunches of pigment in it sometimes it's
very fibrotic sometimes it's very
inflamed it just kind of depends on the
individual lesion of what stage it's at
but look at low power to give you an
example this is what the kind of normal
thermos looks like in this person you
get the epidermis up top
the papillary dermis is normally filled
with fine delicate collagen fibers and
then the reticular dermis has big thick
bundles of collagen type 1 okay so
that's kind of the normal dermis and
then look over here see that zone of the
papillary dermis has been totally
replaced by this disorganized fibrosis
with thicker collagen bundles but not
quite as thick as the reticular dermal
collagen and they're very disorganized
and they're intermingled with
inflammation and they're not usually
quite as organized as scar sometimes it
can be hard to tell apart scar from a
previous biopsy versus regression change
okay but it's a good thing to be
familiar with and know what regression
looks like and also regressions a little
bit in the eye of the beholder too
sometimes I'll think something looks
like regression and a colleague might
say well I don't really think that's
necessarily regression it just kind of
depends on the your your personal
threshold all right in the last main
type of melanoma we're going to talk
about today is this one that I can't
even get on the screens it's so big this
is a nodular melanoma right it's a big
nodule huge nodule of tumor of melanoma
it's got a big ulcer at the top and so
ulceration is a bad prognostic feature
for melanomas usually melanomas that are
all serrated are all so thick and have a
lot of mitosis so they usually have a
high Breslow thickness and have mitotic
activity so they have other features
that would be bad also but that's I
think part of why ulceration is a bad
sign is that it indicates the tumor is
growing really rapidly and those are
tend to be tumors that end up end up
being thick and end up having lots of
mitosis so we can see a big nodule of
melanoma like this in any type of
melanoma you can see it in superficial
spreading in leant to go malignant acryl
indigenous so just because there is a
nodule of melanoma present does not mean
that is nodular type melanoma and I
think this is kind of confusing and a
little frustrating I thought it was
frustrating when I learned it as a
resident and I still don't fully
understand why it's so important that we
have this strict rule but what the rule
is supposed to be is that a nodular
melanoma the invasive dermal component
okay
we're seeing here and the overlying
insight to melanoma component are are
aligned with each other you don't have
insight to melanoma spreading out to the
side beyond the the invasive dermal
component so when we go to the edge of
the nodule here what we see is here's
the invasive stuff all this is invasive
invasive melanoma down here and here's
in-situ melanoma up here and look the
insight to stops right here the invasion
stops here if it goes more than like
three ridi beyond the edge if you can if
you can see in sight to marching all the
way out here
multiple read original invasive
component then usually it's better to
classify the lesion based on the pattern
of what the insight to looks like if
there's lots of pageant widespread and
large epithelioid cells you can say it's
a superficial spreading that just has a
large nodule of invasive melanoma that's
grown in it again I don't personally
understand why this semantics why this
is to me this seems like semantics and I
don't understand the importance I'm sure
somebody much smarter than me will come
and tell me why I'm wrong but in any
case that's what the rules are supposed
to be that the in-situ part doesn't go
more than three ridi I think is the rule
beyond the edge of the invasive stuff
and if we look at the other edge of the
lesion here on the other side wherever
it is same thing we have insight to
stuff here and bassists up here and the
end of lesion is right there sorry it's
kind of tipped at an angle but here's
the normal skin ah I drop the slide into
the microscope all right here we're
looking at it kind of at an angle now
but there this is the normal skin at the
edge of the shave and here's where the
melanoma starts and as you can tell this
is a lot a large polyploid melanoma huge
and it's bulging out of the the top of
the skin and so we see these sometimes
and oftentimes these large nodular
melanomas that are polypoid tend to be
all serrated they tend to grow quickly a
lot of times they have very little
pigment in them and clinically they look
like a big red ulcerated kind of friable
nodule they can look a lot like a
pyogenic granuloma clinically so that's
why most of my colleagues in dermatology
if they see something that looks like a
pie genic granuloma they'll usually
biopsy it just to make sure they're not
missing one of these kinds of lesions
and here's an example also
of lack of maturation look at that the
whole dermis is filled with a uniform
population of melanocytes you don't even
have to look at high-power yet to see
that you have huge massive nests and
they're all packed really tightly
together with very little intervening
dermal collagen and the nests up here
are big and large and as you go down
there's still huge nests the whole
lesion through it's like an entire solid
solid sheet like packing of nest
together each nest is kind of a sheet
and all of the nests are packed closely
together and at the top of the lesion
superficially and the deepest aspect the
lesion it looks almost identical let's
go to higher power and look this one's
got a little bit of a cracking artifact
here in the midst of the tumor but I
think we can still make the point we
have really atypical melanocytes big
nucleoli kind of vesicular chromatin in
this case if you look around
we'll start finding mitosis here's one
right here and again usually big modular
melanomas like this of ulceration are
usually going to have many mitosis and
in melanoma we count the mitotic rate
based on the the dermal mitosis the
mitosis that are in the invasive
melanoma component and we count in one
millimeter squared and that's different
on every microscope we don't use the ten
high-power fields like we use for many
other tumors so you have to know what
the how many high-power fields represent
a millimeter square based on your
microscope and there are some
calculations online using the field
number of the objective and some other
things to calculate how much area is in
a high-power field on your given scope
for my personal scope it's like three
and a half high-power fields but again
you can't use that you've got to go
calculate it for your own microscope and
and then you count the mitosis and
usually what I do is I'll find the area
that looks most active like oh here's an
area I've got at least two here so we
can find this area we can say okay one
two mitosis and then I'll move to an
adjacent high power field and I'll count
there and then another field and I count
three and a half fields that way and I
add that together and that's how I make
my mitotic count and for details about
staging and these change from time to
time you can look at the AJC see cancer
staging manual and we just had a change
back in January from the seventh edition
to the eighth edition and a few things
change and so so I'm not gonna go really
in depth into all the staging parameters
here because they do change and their
significance clinically changes from
time to time so whenever you're watching
this video you can go and look up the
most recent version of the AJCC
and see what the current stage in
practice is okay so again looking all
the way here we're now here down at the
very bottom of the lesion and just like
at the top we've got big Ness
filled with atypical cells and look
mitosis mitosis
I got mitosis and atypia everywhere even
down the deep part of the lgion look
this looks even uglier than the top of
the lesion it's like larger and more
atypical than the cells even at the top
and we're all the way down in the deep
dermis so this is a great example of
abnormal maturation where you have
larger and even more atypical cells down
to the deep aspect then you even had at
the top
okay so nodular melanoma now one last
thing I'll say is if you see something
that looks like a naja melanoma
like this kind of looks like one a
little bit not nearly as big as the last
minutes it's a little nodule of melanoma
here in the dermis and it's got lots of
atypia and mitosis but look what it
doesn't have it doesn't have any
involvement of the epidermis it's
filling up the papillary dermis here and
doesn't have any insight to component
overtop of it so when you see that you
have to think about a metastatic lesion
or a recurrent lesion melanoma that has
been biopsied or surgically removed and
then recurs in the scar or satellite
lesions like little mini metastases that
are on their way to the regional lymph
node we call those either satellites or
in transit metastasis or distant
metastasis melanoma likes to metastasize
to the skin it will go to lymph nodes
and other sites but it also will tend to
show up in the skin elsewhere on the
body when melanoma either recurs locally
or has a satellite or metastasizes to
the skin it will usually fill the dermis
sometimes also the sub-q tiss but will
not usually involve the epidermis so the
lack of an insight to component is a
useful clue that you might be dealing
with a metastatic melanoma okay and in
this case this was actually a satellite
leader I think and in transit metastasis
and the difference between that in
transit Met and satellite is is based on
how far from the lesion how big and you
can again look in the AJC see cancer
manual they both indicate the same thing
melanoma is spreading from the primary
tumor site into or on its way towards
the lymph node and here there's a couple
of nests push right up in the papillary
dermis but they're still not in the
actual epidermis okay and so that's
metastatic melanoma or or a satellite
lesion can both look like this and
recurrent melanoma if it's in the scar
or right next to the scar of a previous
melanoma surgery and you see a nodule of
melanoma pop up and then that's a
recurrence the reason it's important to
know this pattern is number one if this
is the first melanoma you're seeing from
the patient it's worth talking to the
dermatologist and saying hey could this
be a metastatic lesion sometimes
patients will have had a lesion biopsied
a long time ago and they forgot that
about it and it's hard to believe but
it's true patient sometimes forget that
they used to that they had cancer at one
point or forget that they had a biopsy
that maybe got thrown away and not sent
to the lab I know that's shocking but I
have seen cases like that it's very
tragic
also sometimes a patient has a known
history they just haven't met
to their doctor and sometimes we see
something that looks like a metastasis
and after close full-body skin exam
another area will be found that actually
was the primary melanoma or the primary
melanoma may have been present but it
regressed away completely and only the
metastasis is left or the patient picked
at it until it you know fell off their
skin so they kind of treated it with
their own fingernail picking and yet
still it developed a metastasis I've
seen all of those different scenarios so
it's worth bringing up I've also seen
times where we just have a big nodular
melanoma where either through the level
of sectioning or due to a lot of
ulceration the in-situ components just
not visualized but clinically after
thorough workup the most logical thing
is that it's a big primary melanoma even
though we don't see an insight to
components so it's worth thinking about
when you see melanoma in the dermis
without an insight to component think
about a metastasis and and think and
discuss with the surgeons or the
dermatologists to see if that's a
possibility but but just because it's
missing an insight to component doesn't
necessarily prove that it's a metastasis
also metastatic melanoma and recurrent
melanoma sometimes can grow back up into
the epidermis and mimic a primary
melanoma it can look like it has an
insight to component we call those
epidermal tropic Mets so this one
doesn't have that but this is a nice
example of a pattern that you can see in
metastatic melanoma and if you don't
believe me that's melanoma on high
powered there's lots of atypia mitotic
activity and again there was a known
melanoma nearby okay so remember that if
there's not epidermal involvement think
about the possibility of a met or
recurrence the other important reason to
know about that is if it's a metastasis
or a satellite or a recurrent melanoma
you don't measure the depth of it okay
the depth is only measured on the
primary melanoma so it doesn't matter
how deep that is that's not the
prognostic impact is if it's actually a
satellite lesion or a metastasis that's
what matters then the primary tumor
depth doesn't really matter anymore once
the melanoma started the spread or it
doesn't matter much at least now the
last thing I'll show is when you see
this this is what I often see when I see
a distant metastasis of melanoma I
usually see normal skin up here and then
way down deep a big huge nodule of
melanoma deep in the dermis sometimes in
the sub cutis a big nodule a ball of
melanoma
just sitting there in the dermis or
subacute is that's the pattern I usually
see when I see metastatic melanoma in
the skin okay either a nodule in the
dermis or subacute is often deeper down
and not even always close to the
epidermis so that's the pattern of
metastatic melanoma so I think we've
covered most of the main features
remember asymmetry Paget or spread
confluent growth marked cytologic atypia
abnormal maturation or absence of
maturation in the dermis mitotic
activity in the dermis particularly if
it's abundant or atypical mitosis or
deep mitosis these deep in the deep
aspect all of those are features
histologically that should make you
consider the possibility of melanoma and
that should give you a good starting
point and from there there's a lifetime
worth of learning to learn all the
features like I said I'm still learning
new stuff every day about mole
anesthetic lesions so I hope this at
least gives you a good framework to
start with and I'll plan to make some
more specific videos about different
types of mole anesthetic lesions both
Nev eye and melanoma in the future
thanks so much for watching if you like
this please click the like button and
also leave comments below let me know
what you like what you don't like be
kind though please and if you want me to
make videos about different topics
please let me know what other things
you're interested in thanks again for
watching have a great day